We can use the central limit
theorem to approximate how
accurate our Monte Carlo estimates are.
For example,
if we seek the expected value of theta or
the mean of this gamma distribution.
Then we can use the sample mean
from our simulated values,
the simulated theta here.
The sample mean of these
thetas approximately follows
a normal distribution.
Where the mean of that normal distribution
is the true expected value of theta.
And the variance of that normal
distribution is the true
variance of theta divided by m,
our Monte Carlo sample size.
That means that if we increase
m to be a very large number,
the variance of our Monte Carlo
estimate gets very small.
In other word, our Monte Carlo
estimate will be very accurate.
To create a standard error for
our Monte Carlo estimate,
we will use the sample standard deviation
divided by the square root of m.
So, let's create this variable.
The standard error will be
the sample standard deviation
which is the sd function in r.
The sample standard deviation of
our simulated values divided by
square root of m, or
Monte Carlo sample size.
We can run this line of code and
print off the standard error.
This is the standard error
of our approximation to
the expected value of theta.
If we wanted to create
a confidence interval for
our Monte Carlo approximation.
We could look at, for example,
two times the standard error.
That is, we are reasonably confident,
about 95% confident.
That the Monte Carlo estimate for
the expected value of theta
is no more than this far from the true
value of the expected value of theta.
We can create this
confidence interval here.
We'll start with our Monte Carlo estimate.
And we can take away two standard errors.
We'll run that.
That gives us the lower edge
of our confidence interval.
To get the higher,
upper edge of our confidence interval,
let's change this minus to a plus and
run this line.
That is, we are reasonably confident
after running our Monte Carlo simulation.
That the true mean of this gamma
distribution is between 5.9 and 6.1.
Of course, we've already seen
that the true value is 6.
These standard errors give
us a reasonable range for
the quantity we are estimating
with Monte Carlo.
The same applies for
other Monte Carlo estimates.
For example, the probability
that theta is less than five.
Let's recreate that indicator
variable that theta is less than 5.
We approximated the probability
that theta is less than
5 by taking the mean of those indicators.
And of course,
the true value we can get with the CDF,
or pgamma of being less than 5.
Where the shape parameter is a and
the rate parameter is b.
Now, if we want the Monte Carlo standard
error for our Monte Carlo estimate.
We can calculate it as
the standard error is the sample
standard deviation of our indicator
variables divided by the sqrt(m).
Very similar to our standard error
that we calculated before but
now we're using our new
indicator variable.
Let's run this and
print the value of the standard error.
If we look at two times
the standard error, We
can say that we are quite
confident that our Monte Carlo
estimate of the probability right here
is within 0.01 of the true value.
Which is right here.
And it looks like, in this case,
our Monte Carlo estimate is
within 0.01 of the true value.
Let's also do the second example where
we simulate from a hierarchical model.
In our example,
we had a binomial random variable where y
followed a binomial distribution with
ten trials and success probability phi.
And phi followed a beta distribution
with parameters 2 and 2.
To simulate from this joint distribution,
we will repeat the following two steps.
Here are the two steps.
I have written them as
two lines of code and
commented them out with the pound or
hashtag key.
The first step is to simulate a phi
variable from a beta distribution.
And then given that phi variable,
we will simulate the ith iteration
of the y variable from its
corresponding binomial.
Where the success probability is
the phi that we just drew in step 1.
We will repeat these two steps
many times to create a Monte Carlo
sample from the joint
distribution of phi and y.
Let's choose the Monte Carlo
sample size of 100,000,
that is 1 times 10 to the 5th power.
That's shorthand for writing 100,000.
We can run this line of code
to save m in our r session.
And before we simulate, let's create
the variables before we populate them.
The y variable will be a numeric
vector with m entries.
To see what we just did,
let's take a look at the head of y.
We initialized a vector of
zeroes that has 100,000 entries.
We'll populate these with our simulations.
Let's do the same with phi And
run that line.
To follow our algorithm for
this joint simulation,
we're going to first write a loop in R.
To perform a loop in R,
we use the keyword for and
then we tell it what we're iterating over.
We'll iterate over the variable i.
For i in 1 to m, repeat the following.
To put things inside a loop with many
lines of code, we use curly braces.
So we'll enter the loop code
inside these two curly braces.
The first step is to
simulate the value of phi.
So phi, the i th value of phi
will be drawn from a beta distribution.
We'll take a single draw with
shape1 parameter being equal to 2.
And the second shape
parameter being equal to 2.
Now given that draw for phi,
we can simulate a draw for y.
The ith simulation for
y will come from a binomial distribution.
And we want to simulate, so rbinomial.
We'll simulate a single draw
of a binomial for ten trials.
And success probability phi, specifically
the phi that we just drew for
the ith iteration.
This loop will perform this algorithm,
we select the entire loop
and hold Command and
press Return, that runs the code.
This took about one half
of a second to run in R.
However, we can improve on this code.
R tends to be very slow with loops.
And so one way to speed it up
Is to write vectorized code.
Here is an example of doing the same
simulation with vectorized code.
We will first draw all of
the phi variables at once,
From the beta distribution, but
this time we will take m draws
From this beta distribution.
That will create a vector of phis
with those 100,000 simulations.
Now, we can simulate y with one
line of code by running r binomial.
We want m simulations again.
Where each simulation has ten trials.
And success probability, here we would
give it the entire vector of these.
In other words we want to
draw 100,000 binomials,
all with the same number of trials,
but all with a different phi.
These phis come from our
previous simulation.
Let's run both of these lines together.
And they were almost instantaneous.
It is good to avoid writing loops in R if
we can by using vectorized code like this.
If we are interested only in
the marginal distribution of y,
we can just ignore the draws for the phis.
And treat the draws of y as a sample
of its marginal distribution.
That distribution will not
be a binomial distribution,
it'll actually be a beta
binomial distribution.
Conditional on phi,
y follows a binomial distribution.
But unconditionally, the marginal
distribution of y is not binomial.
Let's take a look at that distribution.
First, we can do a table
of the values of y.
This will tell us how often each of
the different values of y were drawn in
our simulation.
So if we run this table we can
see how many of the simulations
resulted in seven successes, for example.
We can divide this by
the Monte Carlo sample size to
get an approximation of the probabilities.
So for example,
under the marginal distribution of y,
there is approximately 11%
chance of three successes.
Let's plot this distribution.
We'll create a plot of this table And
run it.
Here is our Monte Carlo approximation
of the distribution of y.
Again, this is not
a binomial distribution.
It is actually a beta
binomial distribution,
the marginal distribution of y.
If we're interested in
the marginal expected value of y,
again we can just ignore
the phi variables that we drew.
And calculate the mean
of our simulated ys,
Approximately 5.